The follow up consultation today was conducted over the telephone.
I initially saw Ms. Smith for consultation September 20, 2022. In my report I state: "Ms. Smith presents with a complaint of left buttock and leg pain with weakness. The onset was in December 2021. There is an increase in leg pain with walking and standing, and relief with lying down. Pain can sometimes disturb sleep. She has not had any recent physical therapy or injections. She has not experienced any significant improvement with the leg pain. She is not gainfully employed.
Her health history reveals prior lumbar surgeries consisting of a left L5-S1 discectomy in 2003 and 2004. She did well for a numbar of years. Her health is only remarkable for a history of pancreatitis. She is a non-smoker. She is allergic to NSAIDs and has seasonal allergies. Medications include statex and baclofen.
The physical examination reveals her to usin a cane in the right hand. She walks with a limp favouring the left leg. She sat antalgic to the right. Active lumbar spine ranges of motion are non-provocative. Muscle stretch reflexes are 2+ except for the left Achilles which is 1+. Power is 5/5 L2 to S1 except for the left EHL at 4+/5. Sensation is diminished along the left L5 and S1 dermatomes. There is atrophy of the left calf which Ms. Smith says is longstanding. Hip ranges of motion are within normal limits. Upper limb reflexes are 2+. Hoffman's sign is absent bilaterally. Straight leg raising ts non-provocative.
A lumbar MRI was performed May 10, 2022 at GNMI. There is mild to moderate DDD. There is no neural impingement reported. On personal review of images there is a small left L5-S1 paracentral disc protrusion with midline annular tear. An EMG performed May 5, 2022 reveals acute denervation of the left medial gastrocs, with peroneal amplitudes improved from 2019.
Ms. Smith presents with left S1 radicular symptoms. Given her history of surgeries at L5-S1 and the MRI, I have not referred her for spine surgical consultation. I have referred her to a pain clinic for consideration of epidural injection. She can follow-up after. I have also recommended she follow-up with the advanced practice professional in the community for exercise instruction and review."
On follow-up today Ms. Smith reports that she had an epidural injection on November 16, 2022 which helped. She says she has increased feeling in her foot but has continuing numbness. She overall is doing better. She is performing self-directed exercises. She is taking Statex 10 mg in the morning and baclofen.
My clinical impression remains the same. In my opinion Ms. Smith would not necessarily be the best surgical candidate, but she requested an opinion and I am endeavoring to facilitate this. I have referred her to Dr. Guha for further comment. I recommended that she consider another epidural as the first 1 was helpful. I have recommended that she follow-up with the advanced practice professional in the community for exercise review.
