Ms. Smith was initially seen for consultation on July 6, 2022. She presented with a constellation of symptoms including lower back, groin pain, left thigh pain and lower extremity weakness. She describes urinary frequency and incomplete voiding of her bladder. There is an increase in pain with standing, sitting and walking. The majority of her pain is in the left thigh. Physical therapy was not helpful. Ms. Smith reported very limited walking tolerance and she was using walking sticks. Her symptoms were worsening. She relayed that she had seen an internist and neurologist. An MRI of the lumbar spine and pelvis had been ordered. Her medical history is rather unremarkable. Her surgical history includes a stent in the left subclavian artery. The physical examination findings revealed the left patellar reflex to be a little sluggish compared to the right. There was a positive slump test on the left, and positive femoral nerve stretch test on the left. Upper limb reflexes were 2+. Hoffman's sign is absent bilaterally. There are no long tract/pyramidal signs. A lumbar MRI was performed May 4, 2021 and reveals degenerative disc changes. There is a slight disc protrusion on the left at L2-3. Ms. Smith had an EMG study. It was my clinical impression that she may be experiencing a left L3 radiculopathy. However, this diagnosis would not explain all of her symptoms, including reported weakness and very limited walking tolerance. She was scheduled to have an updated MRI and follow up with her neurologist. I have recommended that I could follow-up with her after that.
The lumbar and pelvis MRI was performed August 5, 2022. There is no significant abnormality. There are degenerative changes. A cervical spine MRI was performed August 27, 2022 and reveals moderate loss of disc space at C5-6 and C6-7.
Ms. Smith is reporting continuing pain at the coccyx and in the left anterior thigh. She has attended at a pain clinic, but reports that injections did not help. She reports that the coccyx pain is present 24/7. She has seen gastroenterologist and the examination fi ndings were reportedly normal. The only medication she reports taking currently is Ibuprofen, about 1000 mg per day.
Xrays of the coccyx were performed today and do not reveal any significant abnormality.
Ms. Smith and I had a long discussion today about options. I do not think that there is any surgical issue here, but she specifically requested a surgical opinion and I am referring her to Dr. D. Guha. I am doubtful that surgery will be offered however. The best option is for steroid injection therapy about the sacro-coccygeal joint and I recommend that she follow-up with the pain clinic for this. Bone scan could be considered. Ms. Smith should be continuing with self-directed exercises.
