The follow up today was conducted over the telephone.
I initially saw Mr. Smith for consultation August 9, 2022. In my report I state: Mr. Smith presents with a complaint of left buttock and leg pain. The onset was about 6 months ago. He characterizes the pain as a burning and as if he's "sitting on a bag of rocks". There is pain in both buttocks and pain in the lateral left thigh. He has had an epidural injection which provided relief for about 24 hours. He also tried chiropractic care (manual therapy and acupuncture) for 2 or 3 visits without relief. He continues with self-directed exercises. The only medication he reports taking is Pregabalin 75 mg tid. His health is otherwise good. He is a non-smoker. Mr. Smith is limited in his daily chores.
The physical examination reveals a slow, reciprocal gait. He could heel and toe walk without difficulty. Muscle stretch reflexes are 2+ at the Patellae and Achilles bilaterally. Sensation is diminished along the left LS dermatome. Power is graded 5/5 L2 to S1 bilaterally. Muscle tone and bulk is symmetrical. There is a positive straight leg raise on the left, Hip ranges of motion are within normal limits. Upper limb reflexes are 2+. Hoffman's sign is absent bilaterally. There is no spasticity or clonus, or other long tract signs.
A lumbar MRI was performed July 20, 2022. There is a Grade I retrolisthesis at L3-4. There is moderate to severe foraminal stenosis bilaterally at L5-S1. There is facet arthropathy at the same level.
Mr. Smith presents with symptoms and signs commensurate with left LS nerve root irritation. This is likely related to the foraminal stenosis at L5-S1. To confirm and provide further diagnostic information, I have referred Mr. Smith for a selective left LS nerve root block. I will follow up with him afterward. He should continue with self-directed exercises, and can consider a course of physical therapy for 4 to 6 weeks."
Mr. Smith reports today that had an injection on October 18, 2022. He says that it provided mild retief for perhaps a few days. He continues to have leg pain. He attends for physical therapy weekly, consisting of massage and stretches, without significant relief. He is taking Pregabalin 75 mg tid which is helping.
My clinical impression remains the same. In view of the persisting leg dominant pain despite conservative care, and MRI findings, I am referring Mr. Smith for spine surgical consultation with Dr. D. Guha. I have encouraged him to continue with self-directed exercises.
