The follow up today was conducted over the telephone.
I initially saw Ms. Smith for consultation on February 28, 2022. In my report I stated: "Ms. Smith presents with a complaint of left buttock and leg pain. There is paresthesia in the left leg and both feet. The symptoms are chronic, but increasing over the past few years. Ms. Smith says that her symptoms are worsening. She has tried chiropractic care and physical therapy without relief. She has found that Amitriptyline is helping. She has had traction recently which also seems to help a little. Her health in general is otherwise unremarkable.
My clinical impression is that Mr. Smith is experiencing unilateral neurogenic claudication, although she has started to get some pain in the right buttock as well. An MRI of the hips was performed in 2020 which reveals moderate degeneration. A lumbar spine MRI was also performed in July 2020 and reveal moderate spinal canal stenosis at L3-4 and L4-5 froma combination of degenerative changes.
Ms. Smith may be a surgical candidate but remains reasonably functional at this point. Given the worsening of leg dominant symptoms, I have requisitioned an updated lumbar MRI to evaluate for any progression, and with a view that she will probably benefit from a surgical consultation. I will be following up with her afterwards. In the interim, she should be continuing with self-directed exercises."
The lumbar MRI was performed November 21, 2022, There is severe canal stenosis at L4-5 and moderate to severe at L3-4, There is a Grade I anterolisthesis at L4-5. There is no significant foraminal stenosis.
Ms. Smith reports that her buttock and leg pain is worse, although Gabapentin is helping. The pain is worse with weightbearing and sitting provides some relief. She is performing exercises which are not helping much. She reports that her walking tolerance is a couple of blocks. She is having numbness in her feet. She is taking 1500 mg of Gabapentin daily, as well as Tylenol 3, 2 tab qhs, as well as cyclobenzaprine. The only other medication she is taking is Toviaz.
My clinical impression remains the same. Ms. Smith has neurogenic claudication. Given the worsening of pain and functional limitations, as well as the MRI findings, I am referring her for spine surgical consultation with Dr. D. Guha. In the interim, she should continue with self-directed exercises.
