Mr. Smith presents with a chief complaint of left buttock and posterior thigh pain which previously traveled as distal as the heel. He is also experiencing right-sided lower back pain. He has had sciatica for about 3 years and relates that his pain seems to be worsening. He has had chiropractic care physical therapy acupuncture and massage therapy over the years without substantial benefit. He does attend for infusions every few months for pain relief. He says that he fell in the beginning of September due to loss of balance and he has had ongoing balance issues for which he has had to resort to using a walker. He has had epidural injections in the past without any significant relief. He does not indicate any change to his bowel or bladder control as far as any urinary retention or any perineal numbness.
Medications include Lyrica 50 mg 3 times daily OxyNEO up to 6/day and naproxen 500 mg twice daily. Other medications include olanzapine, fluoxetine, lamotrigine, metoprolol, rabeprazole, rosuvastatin.
Review of his medical history reveals that he was involved in a motor vehicle accident in 2004 when he was a pedestrian and was struck by a truck. He sustained soft tissue injuries. He reports resting tremors has bipolar disorder and OCD. He does not have any allergies and is a non-smoker. He says that he has not had any prior surgeries. Mr. Smith is not currently gainfully employed and reports difficulty completing chores at home.
On physical examination today Mr. Smith was greeted in the reception area. He was using a walker and and walks with a slow gait. There is an increase in pain with extension and flexion of the lumbar spine. He stands 5 feet 10 inches and weighs 183 pounds. Muscle stretch reflexes are 2+ except for the left Achilles reflex which is 1+. Muscle tone and bulk is symmetrical. Power is graded 5/5 L2-S1. Muscle tone and bulk is symmetrical. Leg length discrepancy is noted with the left leg being about 2 cm longer than the right. Hi p ranges of motion are within normal limits. Upper limb reflexes are 2+ with negative Hoffmann sign bilaterally.
Lumbar MRI was performed September 5, 2022 and this reveals an L5-S1 disc protrusion more on the left than the right side with lateral recess stenosis and abutment of the left S1 nerve root. There is disc bulging at L4-5 and facet arthropathy at L5-S1. The MRI was performed that at GMNI.
Mr. Smith presents with mechanical lower back pain and left S1 radicular symptoms. There are no long tract signs. Given the ongoing leg dominant pain and notwithstanding that he has experienced improvement with Lyrica but in consideration of the MRI and examination I am referring him for surgical consultation with Dr. D. Guha. I have also referred him to the Mississauga pain clinic for consideration of medial branch blocks. I recommended that he could consider heel lifts in his tight shoe which may help with his lower back pain. I recommend that consideration be given to referring Mr. Smith for neurological consultation for his ongoing balance issues and reports of resting tremor, Mr. Smith should continue with self-directed exercises and activity to tolerance.
