Ms. Smith presents with a chief complaint of lower back pain, but also leg pain, right more than left. The leg pain is described as a heaviness and tightness. There is tightness through the lower back with walking, and relief with sitting. Ms. Smith relates that her walking tolerance is less than 5 minutes. She has a fairly classic shopping cart sign. She relates that she has not undergone any physical therapies or injections. She is able to manage chores at home,
Ms. Smith is taking Diclofenac for pain relief. Other medications include: omeprazole, ativan, cymbaita, diltiazem, and metamucil.
Her health history reveals a history of diverticulitis. There are no known allergies and she does not smoke. Her surgical history includes: hysterectomy, inguinal hernia, otosclerosis, and melignant melanoma on her back.
The physical examination reveals her habitus to be endomorphic. Her gait and cadence is normal. There was no antalgia. There is an increase in pain with lumbar spine extension. She could not perform heel and toe walking. Muscle stretch reflexes are 2+ at the patellae and 1+ at the Achilles bilaterally. Power is graded 5/5 L2 to S1 bilaterally. Muscle tone and bulk is symmetrical. Sensation is preserved in all dermatomes. Straight leg raising is non- provocative. Hip ranges of motion are within normal limits. Upper limb reflexes are 2+. Hoffman's sign is absent bilaterally,
ACT scan of the lumbar spine was performed in Welland on May 1, 2022. There is severe canal stenosis at L3-4 and L4-5. There is severe right foraminal stenosis at L4-5 and moderate to severe on the left. There is moderate to severe foraminal stenosis bilaterally at L5-S1. On personal review of the images I query whether there is Baastrup's discase.
Ms. Smith has neurogenic claudication and mechanical lower back pain. Given the functional limitations and imaging findings I am referring her for spine surgical consultation with Dr. D. Guha. I have requisitioned MRI investigation. I have also referred Ms. Smith to a pain clinic for consideration of medial branch/facet Joint blocks. She could trial physical therapy or chiropractic care, up to 10 sessions over a month. She is encouraged to continue with flexion based exercises.
