Ms. Smith presents with a complaint of lower back and right more than left leg pain. She has had chronic lower back pain since 1984, but the leg pain has only been present for about a year. She feels that symptoms are worsening. She has limited standing tolerance of less than five minutes. She had prolotherapy without relief. Dr. Smith has done epidurals which did provide relief, but have not been as effective lately. Recent injections around her coccyx area have provided relief. She has also had laser therapy with some relief.
Review of her health history reveals a history of fibromyalgia and RA. She has essential hypertension. She has chronic venous insufficiency in her legs and edema. She is borderline diabetic. She is allergic to penicillin. Ms. Smith is a non-smoker. She has chronic coccydynia. She has had both knees replaced and has had surgery on her feet. She reports to me that she has been using a walker for about 8 years. She is able to manage light chores around the home.
Medications include simpori, methotrexate, leucovorin calcium, sollifenacin, furosemide, irbesartan, clonidine. For pain she is taking hydromorphone 2 mg up to 5 per day, hydromorph contin 3 mg - 2 per day, extra strength Tylenol 4 per day.
The physical examination reveals Ms. Smith's habitus to be endomorphic. She was using a walker. Edema is noted of her lower legs and ankles. There is an increase in back pain with flexion. Sensation is diminished in the feet in a non-dermatomal pattern. Muscle stretch reflexes are 2+ at the patellae and Achilles bilaterally. Power L2 to S1 was 5/5 bilaterally, except for the right EHL which is 4+/5. Muscle tone and bulk is symmetrical. Straight leg raising is negative bilaterally. Hip ranges of motion are within normal limits. Upper limb reflexes are 2+. Hoffman's sign is absent bilaterally.
An MRI of the lumbar spine was performed at GNMI on September 15, 2022. The cardinal findings are: right L4-5 synovial cyst and lateral recess stenosis. Left L3-4 lateral recess stenosis, and severe right L5-S1 foraminal stenosis.
Ms. Smith presents with symptoms commensurate with neurogenic claudication. Given the worsening leg symptoms despite more conservative treatments, and in view of the MRI findings, I am referring Ms. Smith for spine surgical consultation with Dr. D. Guha. She should be continuing with self-directed exercises and activity to tolerance.
